$Id: jupe.txt,v 1.1 2005-01-05 18:00:34 zolty Exp $

JUPE documentation, last updated on 18 Mar 2000

For an ordinary user, the syntax is:

  JUPE [<server>]

If <server> is given, and if a jupe for that server exists, all the
information about that jupe is displayed.  If <server> is not given,
all un-expired jupes are displayed.

For an operator, the syntax is:

  JUPE [[+|-]<server> [[<target>] <expiration> :<reason>]]

If <server> is not given, or if it is not prefixed by "+" or "-", the
operation is exactly the same as if it were issued by an ordinary
user.  If the "+" or "-" prefixes are used, the arguments <target>,
<expiration>, and <reason> must be given, even if the jupe already
exists.  If <target> is "*" and the currently existing jupe is a local
jupe, the local jupe will be erased and recreated with the parameters
given, as described below.  Otherwise, if the jupe currently exists, a
prefix of "+" will cause an inactive jupe to be activated, whereas a
prefix of "-" will cause an active jupe to be deactivated.

If the jupe does not already exist, it is created. The <target>
parameter is used to select whether the jupe is only to apply to a
single server (which need not be the local server) or to the whole
network; if <target> is not given, it is assumed to be the local
server.  This could be useful if a single particular link is having
problems, for instance.  The <expiration> parameter is a number of
seconds, not to exceed 7 days, for the jupe to exist.  The <reason>
argument is mandatory and should describe why this particular jupe was
placed.

For a server, the syntax is:

  <prefix> JU <target> (+|-)<server> <expiration> <lastmod> :<reason>

The <target> may be a server numeric or the character "*", for a
globally scoped jupe.  The <server> argument is a server name, and
must be prefixed by one of "+" (to indicate an active jupe) or "-" (to
indicate an inactive jupe).  The parameter <expiration> is a total
number of seconds the jupe is to live for, and <lastmod> is used for
versioning.  Since JUPEs are propagated during netbursts, there must
be some way of resolving conflicting states, which is the reason for
this argument, and is also the reason jupes cannot be deleted, only
deactivated.  The <reason> parameter indicates the reason the jupe was
placed.

If a JUPE is received with a <target> of "*", any jupes with local
scope are deleted, in preference for the globally scoped version.  If
the jupe already exists, the values of <lastmod> are compared; if the
received <lastmod> is less than the stored <lastmod>, the existing
jupe is resent to the server from which the JUPE message was received;
otherwise, the jupe is activated or deactivated, depending on the
<server> prefix.  If the jupe does not currently exist, it is created
with the parameters given.
